Metrics Improvements (#67)
kroxylicious/design: proposals/003-metric-improvenents.md

diagnosing failures or system slow-downs).

Introducing a proxy to a Kafka system will increase latency of the system. Users will need a mechanism to understand how
much latency is being added for their particular use-cases and have the ability to monitor this latency over time.

Kroxylicious Filters themselves have the potential to alter behaviour of the Kafka system.  Users will need insights into
performance and other issues that might result from filter behaviour. Specifically:

* filters have the ability to change the size of the RPCs as they traverse the proxy (record encryption)
* filters have the ability to change the flow of messages within the Kafka system. Specifically, they can short-circuit
  requests by producing their own responses (the broker never sees the request) and introduce their own requests.

## Proposal

### Deprecate `kroxylicious_inbound*`/`kroxylicious_payload_size_bytes` replace with new `kroxylicious_(downstream|upstream)_kafka_rpc_message_size_bytes` metrics

This proposal suggests that we deprecate the `kroxylicious_inbound*`/`kroxylicious_payload_size_bytes` metrics and replace

> with two new **distribution** (aka histogram) metrics `kroxylicious_downstream_kafka_rpc_message_size_bytes` and `kroxylicious_upstream_kafka_rpc_message_size_bytes`.

Reviewer: aren't `kafka_rpc` and `message` synonyms in this context? Does it help users to repeat them?

Author: Yes, you are right.  The Kafka protocol documentation uses the word message.  I'll use the term kafka_message.

Author: Fixed.

> with two new **distribution** (aka histogram) metrics `kroxylicious_downstream_kafka_rpc_message_size_bytes` and `kroxylicious_upstream_kafka_rpc_message_size_bytes`.

Reviewer: To support:

```
Specifically, they can short-circuit requests by producing their own responses (the broker never sees the request) and introduce their own requests.
```
should we add a `source`label e.g. `source=client` or `source=filterNameA` (I think this is possible to do given all additional messages will go via `sendRequest` ?

I can see that being the next question users of the metrics have. "I'm seeing a lot of messages which filter is generating them?"

Though we quickly head to metric explosion as that is per filter instance per virtual cluster...

Reviewer: Oh right you add `originating_filter` later.

Reviewer: Hmm `originating_filter` or `source` get complicated / nuanced as `sendRequest` is passed to the remaining filters in the chain. So filterA generate a request of X bytes but filter Y changes to be X+1000 bytes. Maybe thats ok? The fact that the message came from filter X is probably more important the strict accuracy of the size metric.

Author: Firstly, it is only kroxylicious_upstream_kafka_rpc_message that will instrument async requests and their responses so only that metric will have the possibility if the originating_filter label. Async requests never traverse the downstream side of the proxy.

In the case where filter A sends an async request using sendrequest, and filter B makes the request bigger, the metrics proposed here won't capture the original size.  The proposal is capturing the encoded size, just before it is put to the wire.  'originating_filter' will record Filter A.

Reviewer: >Firstly, it is only kroxylicious_upstream_kafka_rpc_message that will instrument async requests and their responses so only that metric will have the possibility if the originating_filter label. Async requests never traverse the downstream side of the proxy.

(only clarifying to make sure everyone is on the same page re streams and directions)

I don't believe there is **any** traversal or filter chains that are specific to `upstream` or `downstream`. A message from a client traverses the filter chain from the `downstream` to `upstream` ends , a message from the broker traverses from `upstream` to `downstream` but its the same chain.  If we have a filter chain of `A,B,C` a client message goes `A -> B -> C` and a broker message goes `C -> B -> A`. Client messages are typically requests and broker messages are typically responses. So if `B` uses send request in response to a client message the request will go via `C` and the response will return to `B` via `C`. So if 
>Async requests never traverse the downstream side of the proxy.
means that an async request never gets sent to the client then yes we agree, but if you mean it doesn't reach filters on the downstream side of the proxy then we disagree. 

I think of the proxy as having downstream and upstream sides (I find calling them client and server highly problematic), but there are not separate downstream and upstream filter chains or actions.

The new "message_size" differ from the old "payload_size" in several key ways:
1. New "message_size" will be used to track both **opaque** and **decoded** messages ("payload_size" tracked only decoded messages).
2. Downstream "message size" will track [message size](https://kafka.apache.org/protocol#:~:text=DESCRIPTION-,message_size,-The%20message_size%20field)
   as messages come in from or leave for the client.  Upstream "message size" will track message size as messages go to or arrive from the broker.

> 3. The design of the metric allows it to be used to track messages that originate within a filter.

Reviewer: Just to make sure I'm understanding this point. The metric will allow us to count all messages being sent to the broker by the proxy, be they a message from a client or invented by a filter.

Rather than allow us to identify which filter the message came from.

Author: Yes - exactly

4. The design of metric allow a message-size histogram to be added.  This would allow the collection of statistical information
   on, say, the size of the produce request or the fetch response.  If added, we would make this configurable.

> In Micrometer, `Distribution` type metrics actually comprise three Prometheus metrics `_sum`, `_count` and `_max`.  This means that

Author: I'm in two minds about this.  On the one hand, this approach saves an additional counter.  On the other hand, it feels wrong to have the user rely on something with the words `message_size` `kroxylicious_downstream_kafka_rpc_message_size_bytes_count`.   It is counter intuitive.  I'd prefer an explicit counter.

Author: @SamBarker any opinion on this?  I'm veering towards adding counter metrics kroxylicious_(up|down)stream_kafka_message_count which the same set of labels as I think clean API wins rather than relying on the fact that distribution (histogram) metric actually comprises a _count metric too.

Reviewer: Urgh it's a hard one. As you say the metrics are public API, and consistency and clarity are important.

In isolation I'd definitely say we should have a separate counter but we are in the context of Prometheus metrics with their own conventions. 

I'm not sure that it would be helpful to the end users to have duplicate counters...

🤷

Reviewer 2: I think having another counter would be better to avoid confusions since `message_size` means a completely different thing then `message_count`

| `flowing`            | `upstream` - request following towards the broker, `downstream` - response following towards the client. |
| `opaque`             | 1 if this message transited the proxy without being decoded                                              |
| `originating_filter` | if the request was originated by the filter, the name of the filter.                                     |

#### Add label `node_id` to `kroxylicious_upstream_connections_attempts` and `kroxylicious_upstream_errors`

The proposal is to add the `node_id` of the upstream broker being connected to.  If the connection being made is
for boostrap, the label will be absent.

**How this supports the use-cases?**

This should aid problem diagnosis. If a single upstream broker of a cluster has an issue, it will be obvious from the metrics (and alerts)
which broker is down.

(Note: that proposal is not suggesting adding `node_id` to the `kroxylicious_downstream_connections_attempts` or
`kroxylicious_downstream_errors`. This is because at the point these metrics are emitted, the upstream target has not yet

> been identified.  Emitting the metric early has advantages)

Reviewer: >Emitting the metric early has advantages

Could you elaborate a bit on what those advantages are?  

Where are you expecting to track this? in `io.kroxylicious.proxy.internal.ProxyChannelStateMachine#onClientException` ?

Reviewer 2: Iam also confused with this sentence `Emitting the metric early has advantages`

Author: I am wrong.   When I wrote this I believed the that the kroxylicious_downstream_connections_attempts as soon as the connection arrives.  I see now that it is not the case.  TLS is negotiated, we've identified the virtual cluster and the broker node id is know.  So I know think that `kroxylicious_downstream_connections_attempts` should have the same set of labels as `kroxylicious_upstream_connections_attempts` (i.e. add node_id).

This investigation made me realise that in the downstream TLS negotiation fails, or we fail to identify the virtualcluster, we don't actually have a metric for that.  The state machine hasn't been created so we can't tick `kroxylicious_downstream_errors`.   I think initPlainChannel and initTlsChannel need to tick that metric (the virtual_cluster won't be known). Or maybe a separate metric?

Reviewer: They really should be incorporated into the state machine but that's a lot of thread pulling. 

Let's just increment the same counter without the node_id or virtual cluster labels.

Author: I've added this to the proposal.

  * [Current situation](#current-situation)
    * [Specific short-comings/weaknesses](#specific-short-comingsweaknesses)
    * [General short-comings/weaknesses](#general-short-comingsweaknesses)
  * [Use Cases](#use-cases)
  * [Proposal](#proposal)
  * [Summary](#summary)
    * [New counter `kroxylicious_downstream_kafka_message_total`](#new-counter-kroxyliciousdownstreamkafkamessagetotal)
    * [New counter `kroxylicious_upstream_kafka_message_total`](#new-counter-kroxyliciousupstreamkafkamessagetotal)
    * [New distribution `kroxylicious_downstream_kafka_message_size_bytes`](#new-distribution-kroxyliciousdownstreamkafkamessagesizebytes)
    * [New distribution `kroxylicious_upstream_kafka_message_size_bytes`](#new-distribution-kroxyliciousupstreamkafkamessagesizebytes)
    * [New distribution `kroxylicious_message_process_time`](#new-distribution-kroxyliciousmessageprocesstime)
    * [New gauge metrics `kroxylicious_(up|down)stream_backpressure_state`](#new-gauge-metrics-kroxyliciousupdownstreambackpressurestate)
    * [New distribution `kroxylicious_(up|down)stream_backpressure_time`](#new-distribution-kroxyliciousupdownstreambackpressuretime)

>     * [Add label `node_id` and `virtual_cluster` to `kroxylicious_(down|up)stream_connections_attempts` and `kroxylicious_(down|up)stream_errors`](#add-label-nodeid-and-virtualcluster-to-kroxyliciousdownupstreamconnectionsattempts-and-kroxyliciousdownupstreamerrors)

Reviewer 2: Are we going to have the `nodeID` only for the `kroxylicious_(down|up)stream_connections_attempts` and `kroxylicious_(down|up)stream_errors` ? Reading the proposal further I think we are going to add these labels to other metrics also. Reading the sentence it felt like that we are adding the labels to only these specific metrics

Author: > Are we going to have the nodeID only for the kroxylicious_(down|up)stream_connections_attempts and kroxylicious_(down|up)stream_errors ?

no.  `node_id` will be present on all the new metrics where it is appropriate (that's every one except the backpressure metric).

>  Reading the proposal further I think we are going to add these labels to other metrics also. 

Yup.

> Reading the sentence it felt like that we are adding the labels to only these specific metrics

no, I spilt up the summary thus:

- new metrics
- changes to existing metrics that we are keeping
- metrics we are deprecating

If that's not clear I can improve.

### Specific short-comings/weaknesses

* *1 - these metrics record only the **requests**, there's nothing analogous that records the responses.
* *1 - these metrics aren't discriminated by ApiKey (etc.). This limits their usefulness for problem-solving.
* *2 - the metric name is quite misleading - nothing tells the user that it is only recording the sizes of RPCs that are actually **decoded**.
* *2 - there are no quantised buckets configured for this metric. it gives the user count/sum/max values only. it would be
  hard to use this metric to understand something about produce requests or fetch responses.
* *1 / *2 - we have contradictory meanings for the `flowing` label.  in *2, requests flow `UPSTREAM`, responses flow `DOWNSTREAM`.
  In *1 requests flow `DOWNSTREAM` which makes no sense.
* *3 - downstream errors does not record account for errors such as TLS negotiation errors or failures to determine virtual cluster or broker.  

### General short-comings/weaknesses

* The metrics endpoint populates `HELP` for each metric, but this is populated with nothing more than the metric's name.

>   We ought to be giving a clear description of the metric.

Reviewer 3: I think it's also fair to say that some of the names are less than clear.

capacity planning, drive system alerts reporting abnormal conditions and help with problem-solving (things like
diagnosing failures or system slow-downs).

Introducing a proxy to a Kafka system will increase latency of the system. Users will need a mechanism to understand how
much latency is being added for their particular use-cases and have the ability to monitor this latency over time.

Kroxylicious Filters themselves have the potential to alter behaviour of the Kafka system.  Users will need insights into
performance and other issues that might result from filter behaviour. Specifically:

* filters have the ability to change the size of the RPCs as they traverse the proxy (record encryption)
* filters have the ability to change the flow of messages within the Kafka system. Specifically, they can short-circuit
  requests by producing their own responses (the broker never sees the request) and introduce their own requests.
* filters can perform asynchronous work.  When asynchronous work occurs, the proxy stops reading the downstream or upstream.

## Proposal

## Summary

The following metrics will be added.  They will each be described in more detail later in this section.

> | Metric                                           | Type         | Labels                                                                                | Description                                                                             |

Reviewer 3: Do we really need to prefix every metric with `kroxylicious`? It's long, difficult to type and difficult (for some) to pronounce.

|--------------------------------------------------|--------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | kroxylicious_downstream_kafka_message_total      | Counter      | virtual_cluster, node_id†, flowing, api_key, api_version, opaque                      | Incremented by one every time a request comes from/response goes to the downstream.     |

Reviewer 3: Why should we have `flowing` as a label? I think people are actually interested in requests and responses, which are fundamentally different things. Having it as a label means to get when you want you need to filter as well as aggregate.

To me this should be two separate metrics:

* `client_to_proxy_request_total`
* `proxy_to_client_response_total`

These names are self-explanatory, and shorter.

Author: Yes, i think this is better.  I'll make a change.

> | kroxylicious_upstream_kafka_message_total        | Counter      | virtual_cluster, node_id†, flowing, api_key, api_version, opaque, originating_filter† | Incremented by one every time a request goes to/response comes from the upstream.       |

Reviewer 3: I'm sceptical about sometimes including labels. I think it forces people to have to write more complicated post-processing to extract the measurement they actually want. Here when `originating_filter` is present you're measuring a completely different thing. I don't think people are often going to want an aggregate which included the filter-originated request with the client-originated ones. To me it makes much more sense to embed the originator in the metric name.

* `proxy_to_server_request_total`
* `filter_to_server_request_total`
* `server_to_proxy_response_total`
* `server_to_filter_response_total`

Author: I like filter_to_server

Author: I like the idea if separated metrics for requests sent async by the filter, however filter_to_server not too clear.  A user writing a filter that intercepts requests might expect f2s to tick.

I think we need a need that communicates that these metrics relate to the filter asynchronous request.

filter_async_to_server is naff.

(Thinking...)

Author: I decided I could live with _filter_to and _to_filter.  The description will make it clear how they are used.

| kroxylicious_downstream_kafka_message_size_bytes | Distribution | virtual_cluster, node_id†, flowing, api_key, api_version  opaque                      | Records the message size of every message coming from/response going to the downstream. |
| kroxylicious_upstream_kafka_message_size_bytes   | Distribution | virtual_cluster, node_id†, flowing, api_key, api_version, opaque, originating_filter† | Records the message size of every message coming from/response going to the upstream.   |

> | kroxylicious_message_process_time                | Distribution | virtual_cluster, node_id†, flowing, api_key, api_version, opaque, originating_filter† | Records the time taken for the message to traverse the proxy                            |

Reviewer 3: * `client_to_server_request_transit_time`
* `filter_to_server_request_transit_time`
* `server_to_client_response_transit_time`
* `server_to_filter_to_response_transit_time`

> | kroxylicious_downstream_backpressure_state       | Gauge        | virtual_cluster, node_id†                                                             | Records the backpressure state from the downstream                                      |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| kroxylicious_downstream_backpressure_state       | Gauge        | virtual_cluster, node_id†                                                             | Records the backpressure state being applied to the downstream                                      |
```

But more importantly, backpressure is a per-connection thing, but this is a Gauge, and there is no label for the client's identity, so I'm confused.

Author: Having a client_id, principal or channel as a label would threaten a cardinality explosion.

The use case for this is to get a broad understanding of how often the proxy is toggling autoread.  You are right, it won't be sufficient to identify root cause but it should be sufficient to tell an investigation if they are on the right track.  I'd expect a user with an auto read problem to turn to tracing or filter specific metrics to delve deeper.

| kroxylicious_upstreamstream_error_total       | Counter | virtual_cluster,  node_id† | virtualCluster    | Records the time taken for the message to traverse the proxy                        |

The following metrics will be deprecated.

| Metric                                           |
|--------------------------------------------------|
| kroxylicious_inbound_downstream_messages         |
| kroxylicious_inbound_downstream_decoded_messages |
| kroxylicious_payload_size_bytes                  |

(† signifies labels that will be omitted in some circumstances. The circumstances are explained below).

### New counter `kroxylicious_downstream_kafka_message_total`

`kroxylicious_downstream_kafka_message_total` is incremented every time a message passes to/from the downstream.
It is discriminated by `virtual_cluster`, `node_id`, `flowing`, `opaque`, api_key`, and `api_version` labels.

`node_id` will only be present if for requests going to or responses coming from a broker.  For bootstrap interactions,

> `node_id` will be absent.

Reviewer 3: It being absent is not very self-describing. Perhaps we could use `node_id=bootstrap` in this case.

`flowing` has two values - `upstream` signifies a request following towards the broker, `downstream` signifies a response
following towards the client.

`opaque` has two values - `1` signifies an opaque message (one that the proxy hasn't needed to decode), `0` signifies decoded message.

Use cases that were previously served by the deprecated metrics `kroxylicious_inbound_downstream_messages` and
`kroxylicious_inbound_downstream_decoded_messages` can now use this metric instead.

### New counter `kroxylicious_upstream_kafka_message_total`

`kroxylicious_upstream_kafka_message_total` is incremented every time a message passes to/from the upstream.
It is discriminated by `virtual_cluster`, `node_id`, `flowing`, `opaque`, `api_key`, `api_version` and `originating_filter` labels.

`node_id` will only be present if for requests going to or responses coming from a broker.  For bootstrap interactions,
`node_id` will be absent.

`originating_filter` is only used for requests generated by the filters themselves (`sendRequest` API)

> and their responses.  It will be populated with the filter's name. Otherwise `originating_filter` will be absent. `opaque`

Reviewer 3: I know in the API we use the term opaque. But we should remember that people operating the proxy are not going to know that terminology. Using `decoded` would be more self-explanatory.

This metric records the length of time a message (request or response) has taken to traverse the proxy.

* The start time will be time the bytes containing the message arrived from the network (in the Netty handler, before any decoding).
* The end time will be the time that the network write at the proxy's opposite end completes (i.e. the Netty write promise completes)

The use cases supported by this metric are ones where you are interested in how much processing time it being incurred 
by the proxy decoding and encoding messages and any processing time incurred by the filter.

The requests sent by filter themselves, the start time for a request will be time filter called `#sendRequest`. The end time
will be the time the network write at the proxy upstream completes.  For responses, the start time is time the bytes containing
the message arrived from the network. The end time will be the time the response reaches the originating filter (i.e. the future completes).

### New gauges `kroxylicious_(up|down)stream_backpressure_state`

Reports the backpressure state for upstream and downstream.  The use-case for metric is to allow the user to

> understand when the proxy must pause reading owing whilst asynchronous work completes (for example, in record validation

Reviewer: I'm not sure what `owing` is doing in the sentence. I presume its a hang over from a previous draft.

> requesting a schema or in record encryption, generating a new DEK).

Reviewer: I'm not sure we are thinking about the same backpressure systems. I was thinking about the `channelWritabilityChanged` changed events or their ProxyChannelStateMachine equivalents as driving the gauge. That gives us insight into when we get back pressure at a TCP level. Your description is operating at a different level, that of the proxy itself.

Maybe the two can be conflated into a single measure. 

When the proxy pauses to load a Key from the KMS for record encryption which gauge do you expect to increment? `downstream` on the produce path  and `upstream` on the fetch path?

Author: > I'm not sure we are thinking about the same backpressure systems. I was thinking about the channelWritabilityChanged changed events or their ProxyChannelStateMachine equivalents as driving the gauge. That gives us insight into when we get back pressure at a TCP level. Your description is operating at a different level, that of the proxy itself.

Ah, we are indeed talking about different notations.   I was thinking about the toggling of autoread that we when a filter request/response filter is not yet complete.   You are talking about the socket level.  I think both are useful.  Gut feel is that conflating them is not the right thing to do - they are at different levels of the abstraction.   Your comment makes me realise that I've hijacked the term back pressure for my use-case.  autoread case needs a better name.

Your comment made be think about https://github.com/kroxylicious/kroxylicious/issues/2208.  I wondered if Netty itself exposed metrics around channel writability and maybe autoread.  From a very quick look at the [meters](https://github.com/micrometer-metrics/micrometer/blob/main/micrometer-core/src/main/java/io/micrometer/core/instrument/binder/netty4/NettyMeters.java), it appears no. 

My second thought was we ought to be looking at what other projects that use Netty do with metrics and talking to some of the Netty folks and picking their brains before decide what it makes sense to measure.

I've come around to the view that we should push pause on the `back pressure` metrics and leave those for future proposal. 

In the meanwhile, if someone has a performance issue `kroxylicious_message_process_time` should help us narrow the problem space.

Reviewer: Let's defer back pressure

Author: I've added an Out of Scope section and marked both TCP/IP backpressure and Auto Read state as deferred.

This gauge will use values `0` and `1` only.  `1` will signify that the proxy has stopped reading the channel whilst

> it awaits the completion of asynchronous work.  `0` signifies that there is no pending asynchronous.

Reviewer 3: As mentioned previously there is no "the channel" for this metric.

Author: We made backpressure out of scope.

### New distributions `kroxylicious_(up|down)stream_backpressure_time`

Reports the total length of time backpressure has been exerted.

### Add label `node_id` and `virtual_cluster` to `kroxylicious_(down|up)stream_connections_attempts` and `kroxylicious_(down|up)stream_errors`

`node_id` will only be present if for requests going to or responses coming from a broker.  For bootstrap interactions,
`node_id` will be absent.

The existing label `virtualCluster` will be deprecated.  A new label `virtual_cluster` will be added.  It will carry
the virtual cluster's name.

### Use `kroxylicious_downstream_errors` use to record other downstream errors

> Issues should as downstream TLS negotiating errors or failure to resolve virtual cluster result in the connection being
> closed, however, there is no metric counting those errors. `kroxylicious_downstream_connections_attempts` and
> `kroxylicious_downstream_errors` should be incremented for these case too.  `virtual_cluster` and `node_id` won't be known
> so these labels should be omitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Issues such as downstream TLS negotiating errors or failure to resolve virtual cluster result in the connection being
closed, however, there is no metric counting those errors. `kroxylicious_downstream_connections_attempts` and
`kroxylicious_downstream_errors` should be incremented for these case too.  `virtual_cluster` and `node_id` won't be known
so these labels should be omitted.
```

Reviewer: Downstream TLS is an awkward case as I'm not sure we have the appropriate call backs or events to track it specifically but I think errors from downstream TLS and the [net filter](https://github.com/kroxylicious/kroxylicious/blob/79dd894bf4b69a184e5cc0dc72570ef8cb6a367d/kroxylicious-runtime/src/main/java/io/kroxylicious/proxy/internal/KafkaProxyInitializer.java#L281-L284) bubble up as exceptions and are caught and fed into the existing `kroxylicious_downstream_errors` counter via the ProxyChannelStateMachine. 

Issues where the netFilter selects something we can't connect to should also be fed into an error counter already.

Author: > think errors from downstream TLS and the [net filter](https://github.com/kroxylicious/kroxylicious/blob/79dd894bf4b69a184e5cc0dc72570ef8cb6a367d/kroxylicious-runtime/src/main/java/io/kroxylicious/proxy/internal/KafkaProxyInitializer.java#L281-L284) bubble up as exceptions and are caught and fed into the existing kroxylicious_downstream_errors counter via the ProxyChannelStateMachine

I don't see that behaviour.  A test has been written to show that's not the case.
https://github.com/kroxylicious/kroxylicious/pull/2230

Reviewer: Thanks Keith! Looking at #2230 I realised the error in my thinking 🤔 The initialiser is handling this before the state machine kicks in.
